#THE SOVEREIGN INDIVIDUAL by James Dale Davidson and Lord William Rees-Mogg

##MAIN IDEAS
Societies have a life cycle
When they become inefficient, old institutions give way to new forms of social organisation
We are on the edge of one of the biggest societal transitions from the Industrial Age to the Information Age.

##DEFINITIONS
"The metaverse"; is a dense virtual community with its own laws.
"Feudalism"; the social system where nobility held land in exchange for military service.
"Politics"; the art of how we organise ourselves.

 
##CHAPTER ONE
###We are on the cusp of a new era called the Information Age.

The Information Age will lead to new kinds of community and social organisation which will empower individuals. 

In the past, society has transitioned from [1] Hunting and gathering, [2] Agricultural,[3] Industrial, and now [4] Information.

Information societies will transcend locality. 
Micro processing has given rise to a range of technologies that enhance the capacity of small groups to function independently of central authority and physical location. Due to micro processing, we are likely to see not one world government but micro-governments. 

Violence plays an influential role is how and when societies shift. 
Frederic C. Lane, a medieval historian, wrote essays on the role of violence in history during the 1940s and 1950s. He saw that the way violence is controlled and organised plays a large role in determining what uses are made of scarce resources. Lane's analysis of the competitive uses of violence informs how life is likely to change in the Information Age.

Efficiency will become more important than social institutions.
In the future, financial success will depend upon whether you can structure your affairs to enable full autonomy and independence. In the Information Age a "job" will be a task to do, not a position you "have".

 
##CHAPTER TWO
###A look through history

The fall of Rome can offer an important example of what happens when the scale of government collapses.

The collapse of Communism demonstrates how the magnitude of power can overwhelm the efficiency in the organisation of government. 

 
##CHAPTER THREE

The agricultural revolution and the sophistication of violence.

The dynamics of foraging created very different incentives to work than those which came since the advent of farming. 

During the foraging phase of society, there was little incentive to acquire or accumulate anything.

Farming created large-scale assets in land. Farmers were subject to raids at harvesttime, which gradually raised the scale of warfare.

Farming sharply raised the scale at which human communities could form.

Farming created stationary capital at scale, raising the payoff of violence and dramatically increasing the challenge of protecting assets. 

Feudalism (the social system where nobility held land in exchange for military service) was the response of agricultural society to the collapse of order at a time of low productivity. 


 
##CHAPTER FOUR
###The church and the nation- state. How inefficient institutions give way to new forms of social organisation.

The death of the Soviet Union and the rejection of socialism are part of a pattern of “depoliticisation”.

At the end of the Middle Ages the church ceased to positively contribute to the economy, which it had done by establishing order and facilitating economic recovery from the Dark Ages.

By the end of the fifteeth century, the Church had become a major drag upon productivity. The burdens it imposed upon the population were pushing living standards down.

In a world where returns to violence were high and rising, the nation-state was a useful institution.

Like the church, the nation-state today is an indebted institution which can no longer pay its way. 

A government today offers poor value for the money it collects. It has outlived the conditions that brought it into existence. 

Technology is changing the exercise of power which will destroy the nation-state, just as gunpowder weapons and the printing press destroyed the monopoly of the medieval Church.

Citizenship rests up the fact that no individual or small group has the megapolitical power to exercise military power independently. 

As information technology alters the logic of battle, it will antiquate the myths of citizenship just as gunpowder antiquated medieval chivalry. 


 
##CHAPTER FIVE
###The life and death of the nation-state.

The use of gunpowder on San Giovanni by the French king Charles VIII marked the end of the feudal phase of history and the start of the Industrial Age. It was a reminder of the rising returns of violence.

The destruction of the Berlin Wall marks the passage between the Industrial Age and the Information Age.

The Information Age marks a triumph of efficiency over power. 

The nation-state became history's most successful instrument for seizing resources. Its success was based upon its ability to extract the wealth of its citizens. 

This makes people assets of the state.

Those who pay most of the bills pay vastly more than the value of any benefits they receive.

The new megapolitical conditions of the Information Age will make it increasingly obvious that the nation-state poses an obstacle to prosperity. 

The state was a principle vehicle for organising violence in the world. 

Gunpowder weapons and the industrial economy created greater advantages of scale in warfare. This led to rising returns to violence. 

States tended to win wars; efficiency (the ration of output to input) came second to effectiveness (total output) - Charles Tilly

The state socialist system was predicated upon the state owning everything.

The democratic welfare state allowed individuals to own property and accumulate wealth. Then, the Western nation-states taxed it away. 

When returns to violence are high and rising, magnitude means more than efficiency. Therefore the inefficiencies of democracy made it megapolitically predominant during a period of rising returns to violence. 

Democracy had the advantage of creating a legitimising decision of rule that allowed the state to trap the resources of the well-to-do without having to bargain directly for their permission. 

The democratic nation-state succeeded during the past two centuries for these hidden reasons:
-	Rising returns to violence 
-	Incomes rose sufficiently above subsistence that it became possible for the state to collect large amounts of total resources.

Nationalism made it easier to mobilise power and control large numbers of people. 


 
##CHAPTER SIX
###The megapolitics of the Information Age.

Technology is causing a change in the balance of violence and protection. It is making protection of assets easier and extortion more difficult and less rewarding.

Microtechnology creates very different incentives.

The absence of locale means coercive organisations, like governments, will have less leverage to exploit populations.

For the first time in history, information technology allows for the creation and protection of assets that lie entirely outside the realm of a government's territorial monopoly on violence.

Unlike the medieval frontier, in which the competition was between two authorities, the frontier in cybercommerce will be between hundreds of jurisdictions. 

Governments will be obliged to give customers what they want.

The competition that information technology is driving governments to engage in is not competition of a military kind, but competition in quality and price of an economic service- genuine protection. 

The cybereconomy will finally expose the welfare state to genuine competition.


 
##CHAPTER SEVEN
###The emergence of the Cybereconomy

Paper money is a distinctly industrial product (the printing press and the high returns of violence).

Use of cybermoney facilitates very-low-cost simultaneous billing. In the past, the cost of billing would have exceeded the value of a transaction. 

Virtual reality will create unlimited licensing opportunities that will only require micro royalty payments.

One day, you'll be able to pay micro royalties to players whose images are used to make your virtual reality seem real. 

Inflation can be thought of as a transaction fee for the convenience of holding currency.

Megapolitical conditions will allow investors and entrepreneurs rather than specialists in violence to control over capital. 


 
##CHAPTER EIGHT
###The revolution in earnings capacity in a world without jobs.

The Information Age will change lifestyles, institutions, and the distribution of resources.

The reward for rare skills will increase.

The Sovereign Individuals of the information economy will not be warlords but masters of specialised skills. 

In the place of nation-states there will be smaller jurisdictions, which will cater for different tastes, just as hotels and restaurants do. 

In the Information Age, only cities that repay their upkeep costs by offering high quality of life will remain viable. 

The Information Age will be the age of the "virtual corporation".

Bureaucracy and hierarchy were precisely what were required during the Industrial Age. Ronald Coarse argued that firms were an efficient way to overcome information deficits and high transaction costs (firm theory).

While the firm did capture economies of mass production, it did so at the cost of other inefficiencies.

The new megapolitical conditions of the Information Age will significantly alter the logic of business organisation. 

"Good jobs", defined as jobs which pay more than they are worth, will be a thing of the past. In the industrial age, many "good jobs" existed because of high information and transaction costs. In the post-industrial period, jobs will be tasks you do, not something you have.

Virtual corporations that assemble talents for specific purposes will be more efficient than long-standing companies.

 
##CHAPTER  NINE

Megapolitical factors alter the costs and rewards of human choices. 

Information technology is creating supraterritorial assets. 

Information technology will undermine the power of the nation-state. 

Coercion is a crucial element in human society (coercion is the use of force for one-sided benefit). 

Paying taxes, like bearing arms, is a duty rather than an exchange for something of equal value. Therefore it could be considered coercion. 

The benefit of assets which transcend territories is that they can be placed beyond the reach of the systemic coercion mobilised by the nation-state. 

In the new age, communities will not be territorially bound. Communities will be more precisely targeted to genuine affinities.

The current innovation of information technologies is different from the innovation of industrial technologies. The difference lies in that current innovations tend to create skilled tasks and reduce scale economies. This is opposite the effects experienced since 1750.

Over the last two centuries, industrial automation dramatically raised wages for unskilled workers where capitalism flourished. 

Those who use government services the most pay the least. And those who use them least pay the most.


##CHAPTER TEN 
###The twilight of democracy and the emergence of the entrepreneurial government. 

Government institutions that emerged in the modern period reflect the mega political conditions of centuries ago. 

The technology of the Information Age will give rise to new forms of governance. 

Politicians have a low record for problem solving compared to entrepreneurs and businesses. This is due to the system incentivising votes, over analysing problems coherently. Entrepreneurs and businesses are rewarded according to performance.  

A rational selection process, combined with a constructive incentive structure to reward positive leadership, would mobilise new types of talent who otherwise would not normally take an interest in the problems of governance. TWEET

Microtechnology miniaturizes and disaggregates. It facilitates customisation rather than mass production. 

Democracy succeeded as a political system because it made it difficult for customers to limit the state's claims on resources.

The nation-states of the modern period emerged spontaneously as a coincidental by-product of industrial technology that raised returns to violence.

Technological changes are the most important sources of change. 

The reason the modern age, with its concept of citizenship and politics organised around the state, supplanted the feudal system and chivalry organised around personal oaths and relationships was not a matter of ideas, but shifts in cost and benefits arising from new technology.

What we now think of a "political" leadership, which is always conceived in terms of a nation-state, will become increasingly entrepreneurial in nature. 

Corporations are not able to rule the markets of the new global economy. It is not guaranteed that corporations will continue to exist in their familiar form. 

Microprocessing will alter the "information costs" that help determine the "nexus of contracts" that define firms. 

Corporations are merely one legal form that provides "a nexus for a set of contracting relationship among individuals" - Michael C. Jensen, William H. Meckling

Firms will tend to dissolve as information technology makes it more rewarding to rely upon the price mechanisms and the auction market to undertake tasks that need doing rather than having them internalized within a formal organisation. 



 
##CHAPTER ELEVEN 
###The 'natural economy' of the Information Age.

The glut of information available puts a premium on brevity. Brevity leads to abbreviation. Abbreviation leaves out what is unfamiliar. 

Abbreviated information often provides a poor foundation for understanding. 

The Age of Information has not yet become the Age of Understanding. 

Organised crime provides the main competition to nation-states in employing violence for predatory purposes.

Nations are not able to retain their early virtues. The cycle of prosperity undermines virtues of hard work and modest expectations. 

The struggle is better than the achievement. In many people, the achievement of objectives creates a trap.

For human beings it is the struggle rather than the achievement that matters. We are made for action. 

Achievement can prove to be a great disappointment. 

Ambition sets the struggle in motion. But the struggle is more enjoyable than its result. 

Virtue is dynamic. It consists of effort rather than results. 

Malthus, 1798 "Essay": Evil exists in the world, not to create despair, but activities. 

When change occurs in technology that set the boundaries where violence is exercised, the character of society changes with them, including morality. 

Morality in the Information Age will emphasise the importance of productivity and the correctness of earnings being retained by those who generate them. 

A reputation for honesty will be an important asset in the cyber economy. 







 







